HARI SREENIVASAN: But first:
The South Side of Chicago has
long been plagued with some
of the highest crime rates
in the nation, but one man is
trying to transform this area
by focusing on the everyday
needs and the health of
those who live there.
Jeffrey Brown has our story.
JEFFREY BROWN: Along this
stretch on Chicago's South Side,
Rami Nashashibi is a familiar
face.
He's the founder of the
nonprofit IMAN, the Inner-City
Muslim Action Network.
And for more than 20 years, he's
focused on the root problems
these neighborhoods face.
RAMI NASHASHIBI, Founder,
Inner-City Muslim
Action Network: So,
violence, poverty, lack
of real meaningful job
opportunities, lots of
young people with very few
meaningful trajectories.
This set of blocks was ravaged
by the foreclosure crisis.
JEFFREY BROWN: Nashashibi
grew up the son of a
Jordanian diplomat.
He first came to the U.S. for
college, and later got a Ph.D.
in sociology from the University
of Chicago.
He started IMAN in 1997 to
help bridge divides he saw here
between Muslim immigrants and
African-Americans.
The organization has grown ever
since, and now has an annual
budget of nearly $4 million,
with funding from a mix of
grants and private donations.
This is social activism,
he says, grounded in faith.
RAMI NASHASHIBI: We have been
unapologetically rooted in the
values and spiritual tradition
that comes from the Muslim
community, while, at the same
time, acknowledging that so much
of that is also very universal.
JEFFREY BROWN: One major
focus of the organization
now, neighborhood
corner stores, the small
shops that many here rely on,
in the absence of supermarkets
in these neighborhoods, but
also places that have
historically generated
tensions between the
Arab immigrants who own
them, and their
African-Americans customers.
IMAN is trying to change that.
RAMI NASHASHIBI: That corner
store doesn't have to be what
many corner stores in Chicago
are, often a place of death,
not a spot that you really
want to go into, that we could
radically re-imagine it.
JEFFREY BROWN: At the
Morgan Mini Mart in
Englewood, store owner Sami
Deffala, who immigrated
from Palestine, is one of 60
store owners in the area who
have signed onto IMAN's corner
store campaign.
SAMI DEFFALA, Business
Owner: We have been in the
neighborhood for 27 years.
JEFFREY BROWN: The idea is to
bring everyone together around
a common need: fresh and more
healthy food.
SAMI DEFFALA: We
have stepped it up.
With their help, we have been
able to acquire fruits and
vegetables that are subsidized,
a lot lower price, and,
in turn, we sell them
at a lot lower price.
So, that way, it's
a win-win, right?
JEFFREY BROWN: And
it's much needed, says
IMAN's Shamar Hemphill.
SHAMAR HEMPHILL, Inner-City
Muslim Action Network: You
know, it's a war on nutrition
that's constantly killing
a lot of communities.
Black men die at higher
rates, contributed
to their diet, right?
How you going to change
anything in your neighborhood
if you really can't
start with the place that
really sustains
the neighborhood?
And that's the food.
JEFFREY BROWN: Sami Deffala
says, in the process,
a new trust has emerged
between him and his
customers.
SAMI DEFFALA: People talk.
People in the community talk.
Hey, listen, that guy is a
good guy there, you know?
You don't want to go
in there and do him
any harm or any wrong.
JEFFREY BROWN: Just a few
blocks away, IMAN also
operates a free health clinic.
Here, physician's assistant Muna
Odeh, whose family immigrated
from Palestine, treats many
like 58-year-old Jerome
Reynolds, a diabetic
without insurance.
MUNA ODEH, Physician's
Assistant: People who are
underserved and often forgotten.
And a lot of times, they feel
that they are not in control
of their situation, and not
in control of their health,
because of their limited access
to funds and insurance and
things like that.
JEFFREY BROWN: Here, too,
there's an emphasis on
making better food choices.
And there's another benefit
to this interaction, Muna Odeh
says, a better understanding of
Muslim Americans.
MUNA ODEH: All they know
is what they see on TV.
And, obviously, that's not
ever painted in the best light.
That's especially important
for me, being a Muslim female
who's covered, who wears a
hijab.
It shows them that we
are the same, that our
struggles are all the same.
JEFFREY BROWN: Dr. Angela
Odoms-Young, a professor of
nutrition at the University
of Illinois-Chicago,
is studying IMAN's work.
She sees positive results.
DR.
ANGELA ODOMS-YOUNG, University
of Illinois-Chicago:
Traditionally, we used
to focus on individuals.
Can you make a good decision
when it comes to healthy eating?
We now know, from a
research perspective,
that community matters.
It's really important that
you have access to fruits and
vegetables, not just what you
can do as an individual.
JEFFREY BROWN: Odoms-Young
says that IMAN is helping to
break a long-held myth that
residents of low-income
communities simply don't
want healthier food.
DR.
ANGELA ODOMS-YOUNG: There's
many people in low-income
communities and communities of
color that they are very
interested in having access
to healthy food options.
But one of the big problems
is the structural barriers.
JEFFREY BROWN: Another
structural barrier being
tackled here, finding
jobs for men like
Khalid Partee, a former
gang member and drug dealer.
KHALID PARTEE, Chicago: I did
14 years in federal prison.
JEFFREY BROWN: After his
release, Partee earned a
technical degree in heating
and air conditioning
ventilation.
KHALID PARTEE: I graduated
in a year-and-a-half
at the top of my class.
JEFFREY BROWN: He credits
Nashashibi with helping to turn
around his life and now teaches
construction skills to men
recently released from prison.
It's part of IMAN's reentry
program designed that
was provide both jobs
and to fix up abandoned
homes in the neighborhood.
KHALID PARTEE: When these
guys come out of prison, if
we can try to get them a trade
quickly or get them accustomed
to being in a working condition,
getting up in the morning
and coming to class and getting
up, going to work, you start
making better decisions.
You top taking less chances,
because you have responsibility.
You have got more people
that rely on you now.
JEFFREY BROWN: For Rami
Nashashibi, it's all
part of meeting the
needs of residents in
these often-neglected
neighborhoods.
But even after 20 years,
he admits that far
more work is needed.
RAMI NASHASHIBI: You know, for
every one person you're able
to employ, there's 50 that are
looking for jobs.
For every block that you
stabilize, there's the sense
that there's 25, 35 blocks that
need that exact
same intervention.
JEFFREY BROWN: Undaunted,
IMAN is actually expanding.
It's opened a new center in
Atlanta, and hopes to work to
other cities around the nation.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Jeffrey Brown in Chicago.